In this video I'll demonstrate how to configure VCM or virtual Sanne on a cluster of ESX hosts.
So as you can see in movies for web client I've actually already created a cluster of ESX I hosts and
that's really the primary prerequisite for virtual Sanne is to go ahead and create that cluster of VSX
hosts.
And so as you can see that's already done.
And if we go to our configure menu here for the cluster itself you can see that with a cluster you can
turn on features like DUI arrests and availability and you can also see under the cluster configuration
area we have VCM and we have the ability to turn on the sand here.
Now before I do that I'm going to configure a few prerequisites here for virtual Sam.
So on this first host you can see that I've got one VM kernel port specifically marked for management.
What I can also do is number one I could potentially edit this VM kernel poor and I could also market
for virtual seán traffic.
You can see I've got some other things marked here.
I'm going to a marker for Virtual SAN and I'm going to do the same thing on my other ESX I host.
Now this is fine for a lab environment in real life.
What I really use the same VM kernel port for Wii motion for management for virtual sand.
Probably not.
There's going to be a lot of Virtual SAN traffic flowing over this network.
And so in real life what I would probably do is set up a VM kernel port on a dedicated virtual switch
just for VCM.
I would use dedicated physical switches just for San.
That's really the best way to do this in real life.
You're going to want a dedicated 10 gig network between your ESX hosts just for VCM But this is just
a.
And I'm only using this to demonstrate.
So what I'm going to do in this case is I just need to establish a VM kernel port that is marked to
carry VCM traffic.
And I have done that.
So back to my cluster.
Now I've got my prerequisites satisfied.
I'm going to go ahead and simply turn on the SAN and so will hit the configure button here.
And I'll choose which services I want to enable.
Now notice the first service that's shown D-do application and compression.
This is only available in an all flash configuration.
This only works for all flash disk groups.
What I'm creating here in my demo is a hybrid VCR configuration.
I've got some flash disks that I'm going to use for caching and or as a write buffer.
And I've got some traditional magnetic hard disks.
So in my case I'm not going to enable the space saving features of duplication and compression.
The other thing that's kind of special about my environment.
I've only got two ESX I hosts.
This is the absolute bare minimum for Virtual SAN is what we call a two host cluster.
And we're actually going to have a special third host call the witness how is that we're going to have
to create in this scenario and that significantly increases the complexity of this configuration.
So here's what I want to tell you for your own environments.
This isn't a VCR class and I will be putting out a VCR in class soon but what it will say is that you
don't really want to build a cluster this way unless you have to.
Maybe it's just some small little remote branch and you only have two hosts.
They're fine.
Most cases you're going to be looking for at least four physical hosts in your VCM cluster.
So what I'm actually going to do is I'm going to pause this for a moment and come back to this will
enable VSAN in just a moment and I'm actually going to spin up a third ESX I host so that I can create
a more fully functional vse and cluster.
So I paused my recording and added the third ESX host.
And here you can see it down to the left coast 1 9 2 1 6 8 8 1 9 9 1 0 4.
So at the moment I'm not going to configure for domains or stretch clusters or a To host of VCM cluster.
What I'm going to do is I'm simply going to add the three ESX I hostes that you see here.
Now you'll notice that one of the hosts my new host actually doesn't have a VM kernel port with Virtual
SAN traffic enabled at the moment.
So I have to go back and resolve that.
So I'm going to hit cancel here we'll go to this ESX I host will grab the VM kernel port for management.
And again we're just going to simply edit the management VM kernel port and add vse San as a traffic
type on that I'm going to add Wii motion as well.
We'll go ahead and hit OK and let's try to enable VCM.
One more time.
I'm going to go to my H.A. cluster again and ahint configure for VCO in general.
I'm going to enable the SAN and I'm going to add these three ESX I hosts to V san and now they all have
the kernel port.
So I'll be enabling VCM on all three of these ESX I hosts and I'll hit next here.
And OK so here we see all of the disks that are available on these ESX I hosts.
And so first off we've got some flash disks and we've also got some traditional hard disk drives and
we can see here we've got disks that are flash capacity and we've got disks that are hard disk drive
capacity.
And so let me break them down by host.
All right.
So on host one hundred and host 103 You can see on each of these ESX hosts that I have one flash disk
and two hard disks.
Now if we take a look at the third host Let's expand this guy.
This is the third house is the one that I've added after the fact that it's also the one that seems
to be giving me the most problems.
Notice that it has three hard disks.
That's not going to work.
We can't do this with three hard disks if you're doing the scene in a hybrid configuration.
Each host is going to have a group of disks called the disk group.
Each host is going to have at least one disk group and the disk group has to be made up of somewhere
between 1 and seven hard disk drives and one flash disk the flash disk is going to be our read cache.
It's going to be our right buffer every disk group needs one.
So what I can do is I can actually take this in the lab environment.
To be honest with you I don't actually have any flash storage capacity in my lab environment.
What I've done is I've actually gone in here and manually kind of overridden this and marked these drives
as flash even though they're not actually flash it's just a way for me to simulate having flash storage
in a non-Flash storage environment.
So anyways now I've got on each host two hard disk drives one flash drive and all three of my hosts
should look identical they do.
So now I get to pick and choose which disks do I actually want to claim for virtual San which disks
are going to be part of my capacity here which discs are going to be part of my cash here.
And you'll notice that the only ones that can be the cash here are the flash devices.
So on each host I'm going to go ahead and identify this what we're doing here is something called Manual
clay mode.
So I'm going in and I'm individually specifying what each discs should be used for and if there are
other discs that should not be dedicated to vse and I just won't utilize those disks.
OK.
So for each of these hosts Now I have two hard disk drives that are in the capacity tier.
I have one flash disk that is in the cache tier.
I'm going to go ahead and hit next and finish and it's going to tell me OK here's your total raw physical
storage capacity 60 gigs.
I have a total of 6 10 gig desks.
That is my raw storage capacity my total VCR data store cash is 30 gigs I got 30 gigs of cash available
and I have now created a Wii sand closter.
So what this Wii San Kloster is going to do is it is going to take all of the capacity of those hard
disks and kind of combine them together and create this one big data store that is shared by all of
my ESX hosts that are part of that vse and cluster.
They can all leverage that combined storage capacity of all of those hard disks.
And as you can see here we've got manual clay mode I didn't enable the duplication or compression.
I cannot enable those because this is a hybrid vs hand configuration using both Flash and traditional
magnetic disks.
I can manage my disks here if I want to I can evacuate data from a disk I can get everything off of
a disk and replace it if I need to.
That's where I'm going to do all of this sort of stuff is in disk management.
And like I said I'm coming up with a VPN course so if you want to see some more of these specific operations
check that out you can configure things like file domains.
We're not really going to get into all of that here at this point.
What I do want to show you is two more quick things.
Number one we can see RV Ceann health here at the summary screen for the cluster.
So if I expand that I can get a good idea of what's going on and my visa and cluster and I've got some
kind of warning here so I could I could check that out and you can see some of these issues that are
up here right.
We've got performance dynast we've got a time synchronization problem.
So we've got some issues with our San cluster we can look at VCM performance here as well.
And at this point the performance services disabled you have to manually enable that.
The other thing that I did want to quickly show you here is under monitor we've got a few issues triggered
that are related to the san right now and we can also go under monitor we can see the health of our
cluster so we can relatively easily dig into these health issues right here.
And I've got a time synchronization problem that we need to resolve.
I've got a hardware compatibility issue that I need to resolve.
And so like I said I'm kind of a I'm kind of shoes stringing this thing together inside of a lab environment.
So it's not exactly the ideal Visi an environment.
But here's what I really want to show you.
Capacity.
This is going to show me exactly how much storage capacity I have available within my data store.
So in this case I can see hey here's the size of my data store at 60 gigs of raw storage.
Now as I start mirroring data I'm not actually going to have 60 gigs of usable space much like a RAID
array.
The sand sort of works the same way.
I've got a mirror data in order to maintain reliability.
So you see 60 gigs of usable space here.
That's not what you're actually going to get.
You're going to probably get somewhere closer to 30 gigs or maybe even less depending on how careful
you are about preserving your data in the event of a failure.
So that's as far as we are going to delve into Virtual SAN right now the things that you really need
to remember for the exam.
You can utilize the local capacity of many hosts to form a V San data store and it essentially combines
their usable space to create this one big share data store that they all have available on each of our
hosts.
We are going to have disk groups.
So let's actually go back to the cluster here and under monitor V San physical disks we can see a disk
group for host 103.
We can see another disk group for a host 104 and we can see another descript for host 100.
Those disk groups are going to exist on my ESX my hosts.
And those are going to represent the storage capacity that is available the VSE.
We also saw that we had to create a VM kernel port on each host tagged for Virtual SAN traffic.
That's how virtual machines read data stored in VSE and that is actually physically located on other
hosts.
And so those are some of the key concepts that you want to bear in mind as you prep for the exam.
One final note there is both a hybrid the sand configuration and an all flash hand configuration with
hybrid.
You have a mixture of flash and magnetic desk's with an all flash configuration.
It is 100 percent Flash and that gives us the ability to configure all sorts of other features on VCM
as well things like duplication things like compression things like rate raid five rates sex.
It gives us the ability to implement other space saving mechanisms in order to reduce some of the costs
of that off flash storage.